alzer's Gaza bureau chief Mourns his
wife daughter son and Grandson killed in
an Israeli attack the majority of the
war's victims are women and children
with journalists among the dead too is
anywhere in the Gaza Strip safe this is
Inside
Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm
Bernard Smith while ddu is one of the
best known journalists in the Gaza Strip
just as his colleague Shireen abakay was
in the occupied West Bank Israeli forces
shot and killed Shireen while she was on
assignment in Janine last year W's wife
daughter son and Grandson were killed in
an air strike on a refuge camp in
central Gaza on Wednesday a place they
had left their home for a place they
believed to be safe despite the tragedy
W has pledged to keep reporting on
Israel's war on
Gaza no doubt it will not stop me from
doing my duties no matter what the price
we are paying the voice of Al jazer my
voice will continue to tell the truth in
a few minutes I will go live on air
shame on the Israeli occupation
forces more women and children have been
killed in this war than men or even
combatants hospitals schools refugee
camps and apartment blocks have been
raised to the ground in Relentless
Israeli attacks journalists have been
victims too in less than 3 weeks 24
media workers have been killed 20 of
them Palestinians according to the
committee for the protection of
journalists in the face of such violence
is anywhere in Gaza safe for anyone
we'll be discussing this with our guests
in a moment but first let's talk to a
journalist and close colleague of w ddu
Al jazer producer safwat alut has
covered Gaza for the past 12 years and
I've been been lucky enough to work with
him over that time and he joined us from
Dar Al Bala in central
Gaza safwat thanks for joining as I know
it's a very very difficult time for you
at the moment just tell us first of all
about whale and his
family well you know um you have been to
Gaza several times and you know how the
relationship between alaz teams while is
not only a colleague while is a big
brother and he's close to everybody in
uh in terms of jazer Team you know he's
at the reference and he is the advisor
for everyone since he's uh the most
experienced journalist in in Gaza if not
in
Palestine uh and in Al jazer team in
Gaza so uh you know um we have been
sharing while lots of Social and
personal um let's say ceremonies
including birthdays including the
marriage of his son last year so we are
a family together with with the and the
other colleagues you know I know W for
we worked together in alaz for 12 years
but I know him for more than 23 years or
22 to be more accurate so I know I know
him when he used to work for local daily
as uh as a reporter and then he moved to
Al Arabia Satellite Channel and then
finally uh for our luck he joined Al
jazer uh he's the bravest journalist by
the way I have ever met and I have uh
ever worked with uh despite all these
conditions hard conditions and and
working under the fire he decided to
stay in Gaza uh and keep reporting walk
and talk live from the rubble from the
destruction and I met him three days ago
and I told him while why you are staying
here he said where else can we go simply
so he he thought that he secured his
family moving them or displacing them to
Al refug refugee camp but unfortunately
as he said no place is safe all right
you're a journalist and you're a family
man how have you been able to manage
both those aspects of your life the
family is the most import of
course well that's the the real and the
M most major and challenge that I have
been facing as a father and have I was
forced with my to get displaced or to
displac with my family uh you know we
have to meet the minimum need at least
uh for the family uh we spend long time
looking carrying bottles of water and
lining up at some wells just to find
some water for our children this is
number one number two the food you know
the essential food which is the bread we
line up at the bakery
to bring food and it's not even safe you
know some people they were killed while
lining up at the water water wells or at
the bakeries so we have been reporting
that even our ourselves so this is the
first challenge the second thing is the
fear you know the the family looks or
the children they look at the father as
the main source of power and support and
they could read the fear and the
weakness in their father they
understand it so this is psychologically
is very uh dangerous and for the long
term when the family loses the faith in
the main source of power which is the
father so I asked my daughter a few days
ago how do you feel that she said if you
are okay we are okay this G this even
add more challenges to the challenges
that we are facing in in our work and in
our in our with our families all right
safat safad Al kute thank you for
talking to us from Gaza please please
look after yourself and your family your
you and all your colleagues in Gaza in
are in all our thoughts um please please
try take care as best you can safwat
thank you very much trying our best
thank you thank you my dear thank you
very
[Music]
much let's bring in our guests in New
York is Jody Ginsburg president of the
committee to protect protect journalists
a nonprofit organization that promotes
media freedom and defends the rights of
journalists in rala in the occupied West
Bank is Mustafa barouti Secretary
General of the Palestinian national
initiative and in the Honduran Capital
tus sigala is Irene Khan un special
rapur on the promotion and protection of
the right to freedom of opinion and
expression a warm welcome to you all um
first of all Mustafa bouti in rala can
you just tell us about how important
Wales reporting is in the arabic
speaking World well while as a very very
close and warm colleague who who has
been doing wonderful work in terms of
Journalism covering what was happening
in Gaza all these years uh he has
covered so many wars that happened so
many aggressions that happened on Gaza I
personally knew him very well and uh I
happened to be in Gaza during the 2014
War
uh during which time uh we met many
times also he did wonderful professional
job and I think there were two icons of
Al jazer work in the occupied
territories D in Gaza and Shireen abak
in
ramala and unfortunately both of them
had this terrible tragedy Shak was
killed by an Israeli sniper and the most
recent International commission reported
very clearly that she was assassinated
for no reason uh by an Israeli sniper
and now D is losing his family his his
his wife his son his daughter it's a
terrible
tragedy but also it indicates what
journalists have to live through in
Palestine let me add that up until this
moment 22 journalists in Gaza have been
killed during this terrible attack of
Israel yes during the last 20 days 22
journalist and let me also remind you
that during the last 10 years in add in
addition to these 22 journalists 52
other journalists including sharen Abu
were also killed by the Israeli Army in
West Bank and Gaza yes okay Mustafa
thank you very much jod there is perhaps
no more dangerous in the world to
operate as a journalist than Gaza at at
the moment what are the challenges you
understand that they're facing above the
ordinary challenges they would face from
reporting from Gaza during previous
conflicts well as you heard this is the
deadliest Conflict for journalists
reporting on this region ever in the 30
years that um cpj has documenting this
and in fact it looks like it's the worst
period for journalists covering conflict
anywhere ever in those 30 years it's
extremely challenging uh to cover Gaza
at the moment there is nowhere to go
there's very there's nowhere to hide um
and so and yet we are reliant on those
journalists inside Gaza to tell us
what's happening um everyone who is a
journalist has effectively become a war
reporter and that's been the case for
many G and journalists for for many
years uh they coping with challenges
including lack of
electricity obviously the dangers of um
repeated air strikes and so on um and
all of that while they are immersed and
living among friends and family as as
well was Irene um what do you understand
of the Well from your perspective the
importance of course of freedom of
expression and opinion what do you
understand of the of the challenges of
journalists trying to do that in
Gaza well first of all as you said
freedom of expression is extremely
important at all
particularly in times of conflict how
else would we get news but in this
conflict it is indiscriminate
disproportionate attacks against all
civilians journalists are civilians
under International humanitarian law
they have no protection the civilians
who are in Gaza have no protection from
indiscriminate disproportionate attacks
so what good is your jacket with press
written on it going to do what good are
your helmets going to do that's what's
been proven on the ground there there
are no rules that are being followed uh
by by Israel in this uh conflict no
rules applicable to civilians are being
respected that is an immense tragedy for
the people on the ground but I think for
international humanitarian law the
entire system of the rule of law is
under pressure here and journalists on
the front line are the ones who are
showing with their courage and
resilience how much uh blatant disregard
of international humanitarian law is
taking place in Gaza right now Mustafa
we're trying to look a bit at how how
journalists are able to report from Gaza
and also the occupied West Bank do you
see a way that the do you see a way the
Palestinians are reported about is a
differently as to the way Israelis are
reported
about of course there is a very huge
difference and especially during this
terrible War uh is Israeli perspective
is presented repeatedly and so many
times and uh even when it's blunt lies
about what has happening like that whole
misleading and black media information
about decapitating children or raping
women which which many journalists had
to apologize about reporting like CNN
reporters and Los Angeles Times as well
but these lies keep repeating and uh
unfortunately what I see in many
International media Outlets is that they
do not only report what's what what
Israelis are saying they do not report
what Palestinians are saying but on top
of that if you are rarely interviewed I
mean like they would have 10 interviews
with with with with Israelis and maybe
one occasional interview with a
Palestinian then the the strange thing
is that the the broadcaster or the the
one who is running the interview will be
not only bringing in Israeli point of
view but also repeating the same
propaganda while he's interviewing a
Palestinian and that by itself shows you
how how how discute is the situation how
unfair and how improper it is and the
problem also is that when they report
about Israeli situation it's reporting
about human beings a person who a child
or family who has been affected but then
its numbers only on the Palestinian side
and that's why the state the case
of maybe brings maybe some light on the
fact that these 7,000 Palestinians
killed and more than 3,000 children
killed are human beings they're not just
numbers they're the people who lived and
worked their fathers mothers children
sisters and brothers and and that's
exactly what is missing in the most of
the international media Outlets it's
really really a lot of discrimination a
lot of
unacceptable
discrimination and and more than that
the lies keep coming out from Israel and
they keep repeating them especially one
last point is that they they tend to
blame the victim blaming the victim they
blame us for being bombarded they're
blaming us for being killed this is so
unacceptable Jody um you journalists
operating in Gaza and also in the
occupied West Bank as well where Mustafa
is at the moment do you what are your it
might seem like an obvious question I
guess but what are your main concerns
for journalists reporting there is also
now very dangerous for them in the West
Bank as well with increased settler
activity it's incredibly difficult to be
safe reporting on this area not only do
we have obviously
um the military launches potentially
ground Invasion but in increasingly
journalists are at risk when they're
going out to report from potentially um
people who want
to uh take revenge on journalists almost
for reporting what's happening we've
seen cases of journalists even in Israel
being hauled out of their cars um being
harassed being threatened um we've seen
targeting of military um sorry of media
installations to prevent uh which would
obviously prevent the media from
reporting and getting the news out so
it's not just um the military risks that
journalists face it's also the threats
and harassment from perhaps ordinary
individuals from the police and others
um for doing their jobs Irene I wanted
to ask you about the the challenges of
uh battling uh fake information fake
news if you like there's been a lot of
uh concerns that major social media
groups like meta that manage Facebook
and Instagram have been heavily
censoring Palestinian content in Arabic
compared to how they deal with content
in Hebrew there is this need for Freedom
of Information how do you balance those
two
needs well uh first of all there is no
full and free access to all journalists
uh to Gaza or to the West Bank that in
itself I think is one way in which news
is being sensored there are only some
sources uh that can can work there uh
all journalist don't have access uh
secondly I have received a lot of
reports uh that uh social media
platforms are taking down posts in the
case of meta there was already a a a
judgment uh or or a decision by its own
oversight board about its
disproportionate removal of Palestinian
posts meta claims that it has sought to
uh now improve its uh content uh uh
policies content moderation policies but
of course complaints still coming in and
it's very hard to judge what is actually
happening because all these social media
platforms as you know have very opaque
uh ways of managing uh content what we
also know is that states uh a number of
European States for example have tried
to stop protest Pro Palestinian protests
have tried to remove for example
Palestinian uh Flags uh when when
demonstrators are using it that type of
censorship is of course not permissible
under international law on the ground I
can just only just imagine how terrible
it must be for journalists who are still
reporting uh for someone like while uh
the tragedy that he has faced very
rarely has there been such a demand on
the courage and resilience of
journalists on the ground but full and
free access to all media should be a
fundamental uh requirement in a
situation like this because that's the
way from diverse sources that readers
would be able to make out what is
propaganda and what is fact at the
moment that is not being allowed by
Israel there is the blockade not just in
civilians not just in humanitarian aid
but also on media access Jody yes you
want to come in on that I wanted to come
in on that to Echo that point because of
the quantity of myth and disinformation
we are seeing that's why it's so vital
that we have a plurality of media
covering this conflict it's why we're
particularly concerned at the committee
to protect journalists by threats to for
example censor Al jazer um it is really
important in this moment in time where
people are finding it very difficult to
know what to believe that you have a
plurality of media able to report what
is happening even in the face of
unimaginable threats and pressure and
Jody I wanted to ask you as well about
journalists operating in Israel some
Israeli journalists have not been able
to question the actions of their country
because of the atmosphere that in Israel
you are either for us or against us at
the moment what are you hearing about
that we're hearing similar concerns that
people have been threatened for asking
questions that's the job of journalist
and journalism is to hold power to
account to ask difficult questions um
It's Perfectly possible to do that and
remain patriotic remain um a a a citizen
of your country um and you should not be
threatened or prevented from doing so um
either by the government or officials or
by the
mob Mustafa can I ask you you you've
done well you've done so many interviews
with foreign media many don't speak to
you until there's conflict in the
Palestinian territories what are the
sort of biggest challenges you face and
the ignorance you sometimes come across
with journalist who rarely speak to you
well as you said we never looked at and
never interviewed unless something is
happening to Israelis I mean uh before
this whole War started for eight months
we've lost in West Bank 248 Palestinians
including 40
children one of them was only two and a
half years old we had settlers burning
houses settlers burning cars attacking
communities no none of these foreign
journalists were here or even try to to
to report about that very few if I
but that's one example once an Israeli
is hurt or once something happens to
Israel then everybody is here that is
the reality unfortunately but I want to
add something about silencing others
silencing the journalist silencing the
people uh before this attack started we
we know that there was an act of
intellectual Terror being practiced by
different Zionist organizations and
Zionist lobbies in different countries
of the world the best example of that is
Germany whoever tries to say something I
mean is immediately attacked by this
Lobby forcing people to resign from
their jobs threatening them Etc but it's
now gone much
worse I think the basic approach of any
journalist who works professionally who
doesn't belong to either side is to be
balanced in their approach and uh we've
just heard in the process of which
hunting that is taking place against
this not anybody but the Secretary
General of the United Nations gues who
just D to say that there is this didn't
happen to a vacuum and there is
occupation America United States admits
there is occupation and the United
States admits there are settlers but
because he said that now they're witch
hunting him and the foreign minister of
Israel in the United Nations had the
guts to say that from now on there is no
place for balanced positions he's saying
and that's only fascists would say that
either you are on our side completely or
you are on you are our enemy in addition
to that let me mention very quickly a
few things first of all journalists are
not allowed into Gaza now no those who
are there are there but journalist are
in Jerusalem they would not let them go
to Gaza except if they are behind the
Israeli Army and if they are filled with
what the Israeli Army is steing them
second they are now arresting our
journalist in the West Bank people who
have been
even people who have been interviewed uh
just commentators they are arrested
because they are expressing their views
and then I think I think Mr D was very
correct when he when he thought that the
killing of his family was an act of
Revenge because of what he has been
doing honestly to report what's
happening in Gaza okay um Irene
polarized media environment is not
unique to Israel of course but this
level of conflict intensifies it doesn't
it of course it certainly does and that
is why I want to reemphasize the
importance of Human Rights human rights
are Universal the obligations of states
to uphold human rights is also Universal
there is a right to Media Freedom
independent free plural diverse media
and that is being denied that is
being run rough shot uh by uh the
Israeli authorities and and others at
the moment
uh some allies of Israel which I think
is a very very dangerous uh precedent
that has been created here and has been
over the years I agree that uh attention
uh to the Palestinian problem um that
there's not sufficient attention Ukraine
wiped out all other conflicts and now of
course there's a lot of attention to the
Middle East and I hope that this is not
going to be a transient thing uh it has
to be solved there's there are deeper
root causes of this conflict that
continue and the victims of that are the
civilians in Gaza the the people living
in the West Bank this problem has to be
solved otherwise I think the
International Community is only creating
more problems uh for the future and Jody
can I ask you about that as well the
challenges of reporting in such a in
such a polarized media
environment it's something unfortunately
we're seeing internationally it's
particularly acute um in this conflict
it's an environment in which people are
highly personalized they highly
personalized attacks so in addition to
all of the physical attacks that people
receive there's highly personalized
attacks for those covering the conflict
say from outside Gaza and the West Bank
um and it's really important and I and I
want to emphasize this that the job of a
journalist is to go out and Report the
facts what they see outside we always
talk about you know our job is not to to
take two views about whether it's
raining it's to go outside and tell you
whether it's raining or not and that's
really important it's really important
that we recognize that the job of
journalists is to report the facts and
that people should not be targeted
either physically online harassed or or
receive any other mistreatment for doing
their jobs and Mustafa very quickly the
last the last question to you but how
challenging is doing Palestinian
diplomacy at the moment how difficult is
it to get the Palestinian voice
heard it's not difficult but it's not
impossible and nothing will restrain us
we will keep doing whatever we can we'll
keep trying to penetrate the the the
this black forest of misleading
information and fabrications to bring
the True Light to the people to bring
the truth to the people and I always say
to my colleagues you need only to do one
tenth of what the Israelis do because
the truth is on our side and I think we
should not save any moment without
trying to do that because this is what
could protect the lives of people who
are being killed now around the clock
when five when every five minutes a
Palestinian is killed and every 10
minutes a Palestinian child loses his
life or folks we're out of time but
thank you very much for your
contributions thanks to Our Guest jod
Ginsburg Mustafa barouti and Irene Khan
and thank you too for watching you can
see the program again anytime by
visiting our website aljazeera.com and
for further discussion go to our
Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insid story you can
also join the conversation on X we are
at AJ insid story from me Bernard Smith
and the whole team here bye for
[Music]
now